.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: LGPL-3.0-or-later
.TH TRUENAS_SETFACL 1 "2026-02-27" "TrueNAS OS" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
truenas_setfacl \- set ACL entries on files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B truenas_setfacl
[\fB\-R\fR]
[\fB\-b\fR]
[\fB\-k\fR]
[\fB\-d\fR]
[\fB\-m\fR \fIentries\fR]
[\fB\-x\fR \fIentries\fR]
[\fB\-a\fR \fIposition\fR \fIentries\fR]
[\fB\-f\fR \fIfile\fR]
[\fB\-n\fR]
[\fB\-\-fhandle\fR \fImount_id\fR:\fIhex\fR] ...
.IR path \ ...
.br
.B truenas_setfacl
[\fB\-e\fR]
.IR path
.br
.B truenas_setfacl
\fB\-\-restore\fR \fIfile\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B truenas_setfacl
modifies the Access Control List (ACL) of each
.IR path .
Both POSIX ACLs (ZFS datasets with
.BR acltype=posixacl )
and NFSv4 ACLs (ZFS datasets with
.BR acltype=nfsv4 )
are supported; the ACL type is determined by the filesystem of each target
file and cannot be overridden on the command line.
.PP
Operations are applied in the following order for each file:
.RS
.IP 1. 4
Strip
.RB ( \-b )
.IP 2.
Remove default ACL
.RB ( \-k )
.IP 3.
Remove entries
.RB ( \-x )
.IP 4.
Modify/add entries
.RB ( \-m )
.IP 5.
Replace entire ACL from file
.RB ( \-f )
.RE
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-R ", " \-\-recursive
Process directories recursively.
Symlinks are never followed and filesystem boundaries are never crossed.
.RS
.PP
For
.B POSIX
filesystems the same ACL operations are applied to every file and directory
in the tree.
.PP
For
.B NFSv4
filesystems, depth-1 entries (direct children of the root) receive an ACL
inherited from the root using
.BR generate_inherited_acl (is_dir) ;
depth-2 and deeper entries receive an ACL inherited from the depth-1 ACL.
.RE
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-strip
Strip the ACL to the minimal set derived from the inode mode bits.
For POSIX this leaves only
.BR user:: ,
.BR group:: ,
and
.BR other:: .
For NFSv4 the ACL is replaced with a trivial owner/group/everyone@ set.
.TP
.BR \-k ", " \-\-remove\-default
Remove the default ACL (POSIX only; silently ignored on NFSv4).
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-default
Apply
.B \-m
and
.B \-x
to the default ACL instead of the access ACL (POSIX only; silently ignored
on NFSv4).
.TP
.BI \-m \ entries
Add or replace ACL entries.
.I entries
is a comma-separated list of ACE specifications (see
.B ACE FORMATS
below).
This option may be repeated; all lists are concatenated.
Applied after
.BR \-b ,
.BR \-k ,
and
.BR \-x .
.TP
.BI \-x \ entries
Remove ACL entries identified by tag and optional qualifier.
.I entries
is a comma-separated list of remove specifications (see
.B ACE FORMATS
below).
This option may be repeated.
Applied after
.BR \-b
and
.BR \-k .
.TP
.BI \-a\  position\  entries
Insert NFSv4 ACL entries at
.I position
(0-based, clamped to
.RI [0,\ len(acl)]).
Use the keyword
.B end
(also accepted:
.BR tail ,
.BR $ )
as
.I position
to append entries to the tail of the ACL.
.I entries
is a comma-separated list of NFSv4 ACE specifications (see
.B ACE FORMATS
below).
This option may be repeated; each insertion is applied in order after
.BR \-m .
An error is raised on POSIX filesystems.
.RS
.PP
.B Note on canonicalization:
The resulting ACL is always stored in Windows-compatible canonical order:
explicit DENY entries first, then explicit ALLOW entries, then inherited
DENY, then inherited ALLOW (the
.B INHERITED
flag distinguishes inherited from explicit).
The sort is stable, so relative order within each group is preserved.
Because of this canonicalization the final position of inserted entries
is best-effort \(em an ALLOW inserted before existing DENYs will always
appear after them in the written ACL.
.RE
.TP
.BI \-f \ file
Replace the entire ACL by reading ACE specifications from
.IR file ,
one entry per line.
Use
.B \-
to read from standard input.
Comments (lines beginning with
.BR # )
and blank lines are ignored.
Applied last (after
.BR \-m ).
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-no\-mask
Do not automatically recalculate the POSIX
.B mask
entry after
.BR \-m .
The mask is still created if named entries are added and no mask entry
exists yet (the kernel requires a mask whenever named USER or GROUP entries
are present).
.TP
.BI \-\-fhandle \ mount_id : hex
Address the target file by its file handle instead of a path.
The argument is the
.IB mount_id : hex
string emitted in the
.B "# fhandle:"
comment line or the
.B fhandle
JSON field by
.BR truenas_getfacl (1).
This option may be repeated to address multiple files.
Error messages use the kernel-resolved path from
.BI /proc/self/fd/ N .
.TP
.BI \-\-restore \ file
Restore ACLs from a backup produced by
.BR truenas_getfacl (1)
or
.BR getfacl (1).
Use
.B \-
to read from standard input.
Target paths are taken from the
.B "# file:"
comment headers in the backup; no
.I path
arguments are required or accepted when this option is used.
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-edit
Launch an interactive curses-based ACL editor for the single
.I path
argument.
Requires an interactive terminal of at least 80 columns by 20 lines.
Incompatible with
.BR \-R ,
.BR \-\-restore ,
.BR \-\-fhandle ,
and all other modification options
.RB ( \-b ,
.BR \-k ,
.BR \-d ,
.BR \-m ,
.BR \-x ,
.BR \-a ,
.BR \-f ,
.BR \-n ).
See
.B INTERACTIVE MODE
below.
.SH ACE FORMATS
.SS POSIX ACE specification (\-m)
.nf
[\fBdefault:\fR]\fItag\fR:\fIqualifier\fR:\fIperms\fR
.fi
.PP
.I tag
is one of:
.TP
.B user
Owner permissions
.RB ( user:: )
when
.I qualifier
is empty, or a named-user entry
.RB ( user:\fIname\fR:\fIperms\fR ).
.TP
.B group
Owning-group permissions
.RB ( group:: )
when
.I qualifier
is empty, or a named-group entry.
.TP
.B mask
The effective-rights mask.
An explicit mask entry in
.B \-m
suppresses automatic mask recalculation (equivalent to
.BR \-n ).
.TP
.B other
Permissions for all others.
.PP
.I qualifier
is a user name, group name, UID, or GID.
It must be empty for
.BR user:: ,
.BR group:: ,
.BR mask:: ,
and
.BR other:: .
.PP
.I perms
is any combination of
.B r
(read),
.B w
(write),
.B x
(execute), and
.B \-
(absent), in any order.
.PP
Prefix the entry with
.B default:
to apply it to the default ACL.
.PP
Examples:
.RS
.nf
user::rwx
user:alice:r\-\-
group::r\-x
mask::r\-x
other::\-\-\-
default:user:alice:r\-\-
.fi
.RE
.SS POSIX remove specification (\-x)
.nf
[\fBdefault:\fR]\fItag\fR[:\fIqualifier\fR]
.fi
.PP
Removes the matching entry.
For
.BR user:: ,
.BR group:: ,
.BR mask:: ,
and
.BR other:: ,
the qualifier is omitted.
Examples:
.RS
.nf
user:alice
group:staff
mask
default:user:alice
.fi
.RE
.SS NFSv4 ACE specification (\-m)
.nf
\fIwho\fR:\fIperms\fR:\fIflags\fR:\fItype\fR
.fi
.PP
.I who
is one of:
.RS
.TP
.B owner@
The file owner.
.TP
.B group@
The owning group.
.TP
.B everyone@
All users including owner and group.
.TP
.BI user: name
A specific user (name or UID).
.TP
.BI group: name
A specific group (name or GID).
.RE
.PP
.I perms
is either a named permission set or a string of individual permission
characters (use
.B \-
for absent):
.TS
l l.
r	READ_DATA
w	WRITE_DATA
a	APPEND_DATA
R	READ_NAMED_ATTRS
W	WRITE_NAMED_ATTRS
x	EXECUTE
D	DELETE_CHILD
d	DELETE
p	READ_ATTRIBUTES
P	WRITE_ATTRIBUTES
c	READ_ACL
C	WRITE_ACL
o	WRITE_OWNER
s	SYNCHRONIZE
.TE
.PP
Named permission sets (FreeBSD-compatible):
.TS
l l.
full_set	All 14 permissions above
modify_set	\fBfull_set\fR minus WRITE_ACL and WRITE_OWNER
read_set	READ_DATA, READ_NAMED_ATTRS, READ_ATTRIBUTES, READ_ACL
write_set	WRITE_DATA, APPEND_DATA, WRITE_NAMED_ATTRS, WRITE_ATTRIBUTES
.TE
.PP
.I flags
is a string of flag characters:
.TS
l l.
f	FILE_INHERIT
d	DIRECTORY_INHERIT
n	NO_PROPAGATE_INHERIT
i	INHERIT_ONLY
S	SUCCESSFUL_ACCESS
F	FAILED_ACCESS
g	IDENTIFIER_GROUP
I	INHERITED
.TE
.PP
.I type
is one of
.BR allow ,
.BR deny ,
.BR audit ,
.BR alarm .
.PP
Example:
.RS
.nf
owner@:rwxpPs\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-:fd\-\-\-\-\-\-\-:allow
group@:r\-x\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-:fd\-\-\-\-\-\-\-:allow
everyone@:\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-:\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-:allow
.fi
.RE
.SS NFSv4 remove specification (\-x)
.nf
\fIwho\fR
.fi
.PP
Removes all ACEs matching the given
.IR who .
Use the same
.I who
values as for
.B \-m
.RB ( owner@ ,
.BR group@ ,
.BR everyone@ ,
.BI user: name ,
.BI group: name ).
.SH MASK RECALCULATION
For POSIX ACLs, after a
.B \-m
or
.B \-x
operation
.B truenas_setfacl
automatically recalculates the
.B mask
entry to be the union of the permissions of all
.BR user: ,
.BR group: ,
and
.B group::
entries.
.PP
This recalculation is suppressed when:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B \-n
.RB ( \-\-no\-mask )
is specified, or
.IP \(bu
the
.B \-m
argument contains an explicit
.B mask::
entry.
.RE
.SH INTERACTIVE MODE
The
.B \-e
flag launches a full-screen curses editor split into two vertical panels.
The left panel shows the editable ACL entry list; the right panel shows a
live inheritance preview (what child entries would inherit if the current
ACL were saved).
A help bar above the status line lists available key bindings.
.SS Layout
.RS
.nf
Row 0:   Title bar (path, [modified] indicator)
Row 1:   Left header \(ba Right header
Row 2:   Horizontal separator
Rows 3\(en(N\-3): ACE list (scrollable) \(ba Preview / progress
Row N\-2: Help bar
Row N\-1: Status, error, or input line
.fi
.RE
.SS Key bindings (NORMAL mode)
.TS
l l.
\(ua / k	Move selection up
\(da / j	Move selection down
a	Add a new ACE (opens input line)
d	Delete the selected ACE
e / Enter	Edit the selected ACE (opens input line pre-filled)
s / w	Save ACL to disk; if a directory, prompts for recursive apply
q / Esc	Quit the editor
Ctrl+C	Quit the editor
.TE
.SS Input line editing
When the input line is open (ADD or EDIT):
.TS
l l.
Enter	Confirm and parse the entry
Esc / Ctrl+C	Cancel input, return to NORMAL mode
\(la / \(ra	Move the text cursor
Home / End	Jump to start / end of line
BS / Del	Delete character before / at cursor
.TE
.PP
If the entry cannot be parsed a brief error is displayed and the line stays
open for correction.
.SS Recursive apply
After a successful save on a directory,
.B truenas_setfacl
prompts
.RB \(lq "Apply recursively? [y/N]" \(rq .
Pressing
.B y
or
.B Y
iterates the filesystem subtree via
.B iter_filesystem_contents
and applies the appropriate inherited ACL to every child.
The right panel switches to a live progress view showing the item count
and current directory.
When the pass finishes,
.RB \(lq "Press any key to continue." \(rq
is displayed and the editor returns to NORMAL mode.
.PP
For
.B NFSv4
filesystems, depth-1 children receive the ACL generated by
.BR generate_inherited_acl ;
deeper children receive the ACL inherited from depth-1 directories.
For
.B POSIX
filesystems,
.B generate_inherited_acl
is applied to each child individually.
.SS Non-directory targets
The right panel shows
.I "Not a directory (no inheritance preview)"
and no recursive prompt is issued after saving.
.SS Terminal size
The editor requires at least
.B 80 columns
by
.B 20 lines.
If the terminal is too small on entry,
.B truenas_setfacl
prints an error message and exits with status 1.
If the terminal is resized below the minimum while running, a warning is
displayed in place of the editor layout until the terminal is enlarged again.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
All paths were processed successfully.
.TP
.B 1
One or more paths could not be processed (error printed to stderr).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR setfacl (1),
.BR truenas_getfacl (1),
.BR getfacl (1),
.BR acl (5)
.SH AUTHORS
TrueNAS Engineering <dev@truenas.com>
